#
# CDDL HEADER START
#
# The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
# Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
# You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
#
# You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
# or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions
# and limitations under the License.
#
# When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
# file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
# If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
# fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
# information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
#
# CDDL HEADER END
#

#
# Copyright (c) 2006-2008 NEC Corporation
# All rights reserved.
#

=head1 NAME

I<elfdatamod> - Modify data in ELF executable

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<elfdatamod> [options] -p I<SRC[/SIZE]> -m I<SRC:DST[/SIZE]> I<file>

B<elfdatamod> [-v] -T -n offset vmunix outfile

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I<elfdatamod> is a utility program to update program data in ELF executable
data section.

I<elfdatamod> prints or modifies program data in ELF data section,
not ELF header. Needless to say, it can't print or modify data that
the content of it is not located in ELF executable, such as BSS.

=head1 OPTIONS

The following options can be specified:

=over 4

=item B<-v>

Verbose mode.

=item B<-q>

Quiet mode.

If this option is specified with B<-m>, no notice of modification will
be printed. This option doesn't affect to B<-p>.

=item B<-B> I<addr>

Specify base offset of executable file offset.
The specified value will be added to section offset.

=item B<-S>

Ignore error if the section name specified to B<-p> or B<-m> doesn't exist
in ELF file. If this option is specified, I<elfdatamod> will interpret
section offset for invalid section as 0.

=item B<-D>

Print value in decimal. In addition, specified parameter doen't print
if this option is specified. This option only affects behaviour of B<-p>.

=item B<-p> I<SRC>[/I<SIZE>]

Print data at I<SRC> in ELF executable.
I<SIZE> is optional parameter that specifies access type.

See B<PARAMETER FORMAT> section for more details of I<SRC> parameter.

=item B<-m> I<SRC>:I<DST>[/I<SIZE>]

Write value of I<SRC> into I<DST> in ELF executable.

I<SIZE> is optional parameter that specifies access type.

See B<PARAMETER FORMAT> section for more details of I<SRC> parameter.

=item B<-C>

Remove CTF data section.

This option will be ignored if B<-X> option is not specified.

=item B<-X>

This is special hack for static-linked unix executable.
Other executable can't use this option.

This option acts as follows:

=over 3

=item -

Construct TNF probe list from .rel.data.

=item -

Remvoe REL sections after TNF processing.

=item -

Set start and end file offset of .hash section into kernel symbol.

=back

=item B<-n> offset

This option is used by B<-X>. Otherwise it will be ignored.

This option specifies next pointer offset in tnf_probe_control structure.

=back

=head1 PARAMETER FORMAT

The following the format of I<SRC> argument for B<-p> and B<-m> option,
and I<DST> parameter for B<-m> option:

=head2 IMMEDIATE

If decimal or hexadecimal value is specified, it will be considered as
immediate value.

If an immediate value is specified to I<SRC> parameter for B<-p> or
I<DST> parameter for B<-m>, it will be considered as virtual address.
For instance, "-p 0x8002000" option will print value at the virtual
address 0x8002000 in ELF executable.

If an immediate value is specified to I<SRC> parameter for B<-m>,
it will be considered as immediate value. For instance,
"-m 0x1234:0x130024" option will write 0x1234 to the virtual address
0x130024 in ELF executable.

If '*' is preceding immediate, I<elfdatamod> will try to dereference.
For instance, "-p *0x8002000" will read data at virtual address 0x8002000.
Note that '-m' option never allows dereference.

=head2 SECTION OFFSET

If the first character of I<SRC> is '^', it will be converted to
start offset of the ELF section.

If the first character of I<SRC> is '$', it will be converted to
end offset of the ELF section. "End offset" means "start offset +
section size". If B<-B> option is specified, its value will be added to
offset value.

For instance, "-p ^.text" will print start offset of text section.
And "-B 0x10000 -p ^.text" will print (start offset of text section + 0x10000).

This format can't be specified to I<DST> parameter for B<-m>.

=head2 SYMBOL ADDRESS

If the first charactet of I<SRC> or I<DST> is '&', it will be converted
to address of the specified symbol.

For instance, "-m ^.text:&text_start" will write start address of
text section info "text_start" variable.

=head2 FILE OFFSET

If the first character of I<SRC> is '%', it will be converted to
file offset associated with the specified symbol or address.

For instance, '-p %_start' will print file offset associated with the
symbol "_start".

=head2 SYMBOL

Otherwise, the parameter will be considered as symbol name, it will be
converted to value of symbol.

For instance, "-p text_start" will print value of "text_start" variable.

This format can't be specified to I<DST> parameter for B<-m>.

If '*' is preceding symbol, I<elfdatamod> will try to dereference.
For instance, "-p *data1" will read data of "data1" variable, and then
read data at value of "data1" variable.
Note that '-m' option never allows dereference.

=head2 ACCESS SIZE

I<SIZE> parameter specifies access size.
If omitted, word (4 bytes) access will be chosen.

=over 4

=item B<b>

Byte (1 byte) access

=item B<h>

Halfword (2 bytes) access

=item B<w>

Word (4 bytes) access

=item B<d>

Doubleword (8 bytes) access

=back

If host endianess differs from ELF file endianess, the input or output data
will be byte-swapped.

For instance, "-p 0x12400/b" read 1 byte from virtual address 0x12400 and
print it. "-m src_value:&dst_value/d" read 8 bytes from "src_value" variable,
and write as value of "dst_value" variable.

=head1 NOTES

=over 3

=item -

If both B<-p> and B<-m> are specified, all B<-p> options will be processed
prior to B<-m>.

=item -

If an error occurs, I<elfdatamod> will be aborted immediately without
any recovery.

=back
